(radio sounds)
Narrator:
Nightmares, flashbacks,
-vigilance, depressi
sudden rages,
sudden sadness, mood swings...
(distant artillery fire,
gunshots)
Once the public knew little
about post-traumatic
stress disorder.
It was seeing what happened
to our soldiers,
in the terrible trauma of war-
and the anguish that
followed them home,
disrupting their physical
and mental health
and affecting loved ones-
that brought the term
PTSD to public awareness.
But we know now
it's not just our soldiers
whose lives can be overwhelmed
by the symptoms of PTSD.
Young people living
in impoverished,
urban neighborhoods
across America
too-often suffer through
similar stressors.
Man:
The first time I got shot,
I thought I was going
to really, really die.
Woman:
And I looked, and it was
actually a body in the street,
and for my kids to see that...
They messed up my whole
Young Woman:
I have, like, high anxiety,
and I just feel paranoid
all the time.
Man:
For the young people
in the inner city
we actually see
the full-blown syndrome
of post-traumatic stress
disorder or PTSD,
every bit the same syndrome
that we see
in returning combat veterans
from places like Iraq
and Afghanistan.
Narrator:
Children and young people
growing up in pockets
of concentrated poverty
can often be exposed
to violence...
(gunshots)
...personal conflict, extreme
anxiety, and other adversities
as disturbing as some war zones.
Rich:
If we believe that behaviors
are shaped
out of experience-
and we know that's how
the brain develops-
then we should expect
that people will behave
based on their experiences,
and they sometimes are reacting
because those experiences
were traumatic.
If these young people
have been harmed or injured
by the stress in their lives,
then what they really
need is healing.
We have two choices.
We can ask ourselves,
"What's wrong with this person?"
or we can ask,
"What happened to this person?"
Narrator:
In 2012, The New York Times
ranked Oakland, California
the fifth most
desirable destination
to visit in the world,
between number four, London
and number six, Tokyo.
This city is also one
of the nation's most dangerous.
The number of
shootings in Oakland
has risen in recent years,
from 869 in 2009,
to over 1,500 in 2011.
These shootings are
overwhelmingly concentrated
in two of its most
impoverished neighborhoods,
East Oakland
and West Oakland.
The city's economic renaissance
with its new high-tech jobs
trendy boutiques, and pricey
condos doesn't reach that far.
Young Woman:
I heard hella gunshots.
I've never heard gunshots
that close tome...
Narrator:
Caheri Gutierrez, age 23,
grew up in
deep East Oakland
and is now a counselor
at Youth Alive!.
Raise your hand
if you know somebody
who's been affected
by gun violence...
Narrator:
She's a violence prevention
educator, teaching teens
about conflict resolution
and other safety issues.
The teens she trains
become leaders
who go on to teach
younger kids.
One of the dudes
from the gang...
Narrator:
Caheri uses her own experience
to explore how exposure
to trauma can trigger
dramatic changes in moods
and behaviors.
Caheri:
I must have been a sophomore
or freshman in high school...
It was when I saw my brother
get shot in the head.
He was a gang member.
I didn't have a dad in my life.
So this was my role model,
my father figure, my
best friend.
He had a huge bullet hole
in his head...
And I put my hand on the,
you know, hole, and...
hella blood was
just coming out,
and the blood was so warm.
Like I vividly remember that...
blood was hellawarm...
Narrator:
Amazingly, her brother, Gustavo
survived the shooting,
but that didn't mean Caheri's
own problems were over.
Caheri:
I left Highland Hospital
with a whole different attitude,
like a straight bitch.
I don't give a fuck, da-da-da...
that attitude...
smoking hella weed,
yeah, drinking, too...
Rich:
There's a cascade of things
that happen after trauma.
Many young people turn
to alcohol or marijuana
in order to treat
their symptoms.
Man, I had some good-ass
grades in high school.
I was playing volleyball
for the state of California.
I couldn't focus,
I just couldn't.
The teacher's talking
about biology and the cells
and da-da-da-da-da,
and I'm just thinking
about images of my brother
getting shot again,
and again, and again.
Woman:
A child in that state
cannot sit comfortably
and calmly in a seat
and take in information
about world geography.
They can't doit.
Our minds don't work that
Narrator:
Caheri struggled hard
to keep her life together
after Gustavo was shot.
A year later,
on a November night,
Caheri was on her way
with a friend to help out
the driver starts screaming,
"We're shot! We're shot!
We're shot!"
When he looked at me,
I just saw a look on his face
that was like he saw a ghost.
So, the bullet came in
through the back window,
and it struck me
on my right mandible,
came out of my mouth,
knocked down, you know,
a lot of my front teeth
and back teeth.
Into the guy's arm.
Same bullet.
(heart monitor beeping)
Narrator:
Caheri doesn't know
who shot her.
The perpetrator
was never arrested.
Over time, she would
endure five surgeries
to rebuild her face.
Caheri:
I woke up in the hospital.
From the moment
I opened my eyes,
I knew that things
had changed.
Narrator:
We know that people
who've suffered trauma
are often left not
only with physical
but also psychological injuries.
Caheri:
I was paranoid...
I had nightmares...
nightmares so much that
I did not want to sleep...
Rich:
We often see young people
who are hyper-vigilant
or hyper-aroused.
That means if you clap your
hands or make a noise,
these young people will jump
out of their skin.
If someone will come
from behind me
and be like, "Hey, Caheri,"
I'd be like, "Oh sh...l"
Like that.
And then just start crying
because I felt like I'm crazy.
Narrator:
For people suffering
with PTSD, the natural
fight-or-flight response
doesn't really turn off.
Their brain continues
releasing chemicals
which trigger feelings of
fear, anxiety, anger
or depression even when
the danger is long gone.
(unintelligible baby talk)
Across town, 23-year-old
Antonio Carter also suffers
with similar symptoms
of trauma
brought on by a pile-up
of adversities...
though getting shot himself
wasn't one of them.
Where's the cars at?
Ahh, the city fell, Tony...
It fell?
Yeah, got to pick it
back up...
Narrator:
The problems came on early.
Cancer took his mother
when he was twelve years old.
Antonio:
And my dad, like,
we asked him
to take care of us.
But he couldn't do it.
With us not having
a father figure around,
it was like life or death,
every man for they-self,
you know what I mean?
Narrator:
Now, mostly on his own,
without trusted adults
to help him,
Antonio found tensions
in the neighborhood
could be overwhelming.
Antonio:
We were sitting together,
and we were all in a circle,
and him and my friend,
my other friend,
started arguing, and my other
friend just pulled out a gun
and shot him right there,
like right in front me.
Like right here...
I was just looking, like...
Make it bigger then.
How big are you gonna
make it then?
Antonio:
After seeing so much blood
and so many people dying
for so long...
it only makes you crazy.
Narrator:
Today there are new worries,
like completing his Emergency
Medical Technician certification
and keeping
two-year-old Tony, Jr. safe
in the same
Oakland streets.
Antonio:
Right now, I don't even
let him go outside to the front,
to play in the front yard...
because I know
what could happen.
One of my worst
fears is, like,
walking down the street
with my son,
and you know what I mean,
like, and all of a sudden,
like, shots just start...
I wouldn't know what
to doit I lose him because,
like, him and his mom,
he's all I got.
Narrator:
As it turns out,
such worry over safety
is only one of an unending
stream of stressors
which many young people
and children face.
South Africa, 1987.
Psychologist Gill Straker
was struggling to describe
the traumatic stress
and adversity
faced by black townships
under apartheid.
She coined the term, Continuous
Traumatic Stress Syndrome.
Continuous, because for
these young people,
there was neither pre-trauma
nor post-trauma.
They were living lives
of unrelenting adversity...
As many young people do
in our own cities.
Chicago...
Washington, DC...
Omaha... Baltimore...
New Orleans...
St. Louis... Detroit...
Los Angeles...
In cities across America,
many young people are living,
from birth, in neighborhoods
exposed not only to violence
but also entrenched poverty
and social isolation.
the result of decades of
business flight,
government neglect, and
residential segregation.
Woman:
So, there are entire communities
in America
that are disconnected
generationally from
labor markets.
They don't have a job.
Their parents didn't have a
Their grandparents might
have been underemployed
or unemployed.
Those communities are
black and brown communities
separated very much
from communities that are white.
Rich:
There's a stress
that goes with poverty.
(sirens)
Noise, lack of safe housing,
lots of vacant lots...
The police actually might
be perceived as enemies to you.
The stress that comes
from being
low down on
the social ladder...
Caheri:
A lot of our kids,
a lot of our youth,
they live in these homes
where they've been neglected
since they were young...
If you guys ever had therapy
raise your hand...
Maybe they haven't slept, you
know, maybe they haven't eaten.
Their parents might not have
a job, there's constant stress.
There's drug dealers.
All the time they're under
this stress, hyper-arousal.
Rich:
It used to be we thought
about trauma as someone
being in a plane crash,
or someone having
a gunshot wound.
Those are types of trauma.
But more generally, we can
talk about trauma
as that when the
strengths inside you and
the resources around you can't
respond to a threat,
that is an experience of trauma.
Man:
It doesn't necessarily
have to be from an injury
that occurred to them,
but it could be over the course,
over their life course,
how they've been exposed
to various types of stress,
adversity, and trauma.
Narrator:
Dr. Ted Corbin practices
emergency medicine
at Hahnemann University
Hospital in Philadelphia...
another city where the class
divide can be dramatic.
Neighborhoods run the gamut
from comfortable historic homes
to some of the most
economically distressed
communities in the country.
Researchers suggest the PTSD
rate among the urban poor
in Philadelphia could be
a shocking forty percent.
The city's corrosive
history of race-based politics
of economic exclusion undermined
many non-white neighborhoods,
leaving them without jobs,
infrastructure,
or affordable housing.
The poverty rate in 2011 was
34% for African Americans,
42% for Latinos.
More than one in three
children in Philadelphia
grow up in poverty.
From birth they are swimming
against a stream of stressors.
Over-crowded or
run-down housing.
Family worries about job loss,
making rent and paying bills.
Having enough to eat.
Substance abuse.
Domestic conflict.
Neighborhood safety.
Y'all walk with me...
Narrator:
Twenty-four-year-old
Christine Henry can relate.
She's been bringing up her
children in North Philadelphia.
Three-year-old Key-yon
loves trucks.
Older brother Izayah
is four years old
and excited about going
to kindergarten next year.
Six-week-old Christian
is the new family member.
Like all loving parents,
Christine and her partner,
Tracy, work hard
to provide the safe, stable
and nurturing environment
that all children
need to strive.
No car coming!
You sure?
Narrator:
It isn't easy.
Christine recalls what happened
after one family outing.
Christine:
It's like, within a blink
of an eye, all you heard was
pow, pow, pow, pow...
and it was like,
extremely close.
Narrator:
Four-year-old Izayah
was with her at the time.
Christine:
I grabbed him
but I actually hid him
and I used myself to cover him.
So I did everything in my power
to keep his eyes away from it,
to keep him away from it,
to cover his ears,
everything to just try
and take some of that fear
away from him,
because instantly
he just tensed up.
When we finally got into the
home and everything was over
and everything was done with,
he was really scared,
he didn't want anybody
to touch him.
Narrator:
After the incident,
Christine went to 11th Street
Family Health Services for help.
It's her North Philadelphia
health center,
serving a sometimes
dangerous neighborhood.
We gotta go...
Narrator:
At Eleventh Street,
social worker
Aisha Coul son-Walters
was able to provide Christine
with counseling and support.
Aisha could also see the
incident had affected Izayah.
Aisha:
He was crying,
he would get, like, angry.
He just seemed fearful.
Like, he would jump;
he would, you know,
have moments of hesitation, and
just look like he was afraid.
Narrator:
But how many of our children
grow up facing
similar stressors?
On the same side of town,
Dr. Dan Taylor recounts a study
of seven-year-old children
exposed to street violence.
He practices at St.
Christopher's Hospital
for Children, serving
residents in this
North Philadelphia neighborhood.
Taylor:
75% of those seven-year-olds
heard gunshots
in this neighborhood.
61% of those kids,
seven-year-olds, were worried
that they would get shot
and killed themselves...
An incredible 10% of kids
in this neighborhood
saw a dead body,
someone being shot, or stabbed.
Some people talk about
post-traumatic stress disorder,
but unfortunately, in a lot
of these families,
there is no "post."
It's continuous.
It's always there.
It's on the street.
It's in the home.
We have a lot of mothers
who don't let their children
ever outside,
because of the stress
and the potential
danger outside.
We have some moms
who even say,
"I let my kid play
on the block."
And then we say,
"Up and down the block?"
And she says, "No,
just on the block
"of cement in front of my house.
I don't let him go
anywhere else."
Look! This! This!
Christine:
I wanted to just do whatever
necessary to make sure
that this isn't the life
that my kids think is normal...
Come on,
give me your hand.
Christine:
...because it's not.
Because it's far
from normal to me.
Narrator:
Today Christine has come
to Eleventh Street Family
Health Services
for baby Christian's
six-week check-up.
Oh, he's so gorgeous...
Narrator:
Eleventh Street was developed
with the community, as a
community partnership
to provide a wide range
of services.
Everything from pre-natal care
and dentistry
to counseling, art therapy,
and even urban farming.
You can't see something this
scrumptious
and just let him sit...
Hey, why you picking
that baby up?
This is your baby?
Yes! I don't want you
pick that baby up!
Aisha:
Izayah has become
very protective
of his middle brother
as well as his younger brother
and you know,
wanted to make sure
everybody who was interacting
kind of knew,
like, "Listen.
I'm their bodyguard."
It was really cute
to see, like,
a big brother express
himself like that
but at the same time,
maybe the protectiveness
that he's displaying
is the result
of what he has experienced
in that traumatic event
that he was exposed to.
Narrator:
The stressors many children face
day to day in
neglected communities
like North Philadelphia
can be relentless.
(sirens)
Man:
We can really manage
a lot of stressors.
If we are crossing the street
and we see that a truck
is coming at us...
(truck horn)
...we can manage
that situation,
get scared, jump,
and move quickly.
Unfortunately, many children
in our society
feel like a truck is coming
at them all daylong,
for more days than not,
and this really takes a toll.
Narrator:
We know from anew body
of research that exposure to
chronic stress early in life
can lead to actual changes
in brain architecture.
Bloom:
A child's development
is affected by chronic stress.
The impact of the chemicals that
are released as a
result of stress,
that kind of unrelenting
drip-drip-drip
that affects, then, the way
the brain develops.
So language functions,
the ability to think clearly,
the ability to focus,
to organize thoughts-
allot that is being laid down
in very early childhood.
When a child is exposed
to toxic stress
then the brain is not connecting
the way it should.
Narrator:
Especially toxic for children
can be exposure to conflict
or violence in the home.
Woman:
I remember having
a little two-ish,
three-ish year-old child
who was hitting
their baby doll.
Well, they didn't make that up.
Even if they weren't
in the room
when the domestic
violence occurred
or when the physical
violence occurred,
they still feel those effects
very, very deeply.
Bloom:
They are perceiving the world
as dangerous all the time and
defending against those feelings
by becoming aggressive.
They may have the history
of what happened,
they may have feelings
about what happened -
fear, sadness, anger.
They may have no words
for these feelings,
and then they have
these behaviors.
But they really do not
connect all of them.
They don't know that
because this happened,
I developed these feelings,
that make me behave this way.
It's not mine!
Narrator:
And for many of us
who serve children, we don't
make those connections either.
A 2005 study reported
the number of children
expelled from preschool
for behavioral problems
at three times the expulsion
rate for K to 12 students.
In 2012, in Connecticut alone,
2,000 children
years and under-
overwhelmingly black
and Latino-
were suspended from
kindergarten and preschool,
dramatically increasing
their risk of
dropping out later and
being sent to prison.
Instead of labeling them as
bad kids, why don't we see them
as children facing adversities
that other children don't?
Why are we re-traumatizing
young people
who are already
traumatized?
Bloom:
We've become so blaming
that whenever somebody strays,
it's their fault and
they should be punished.
Narrator:
In the mid-90's,
doctors Vincent Felitti
and Robert Anda
published groundbreaking
research,
assessing the links
between childhood adversity
and adult health
and well-being.
In the original Adverse
Childhood Experiences Study,
known as the ACE Study,
17,000 mostly white,
mostly middle class adults
were asked about ten different
types of childhood adversity.
When you were a child,
were you physically or
psychologically
abused by parents?
Did you live with someone
who abused drugs?
Were you neglected?
Was there domestic violence?
Did anyone go to prison?
Was someone in your home
mentally ill?
Respondents were assigned
one ACE for each
of the ten types
of adversity experienced.
Surprisingly, more than
one in five
of this mostly middle
class population
reported three or more ACEs.
But even more eye-opening
was the correlation
between childhood adversity
and adult mental
and physical health.
Bloom:
The higher the ACE score,
the more likely people were
to suffer from things like
heart disease, liver disease,
lung disease,
depression, suicide,
I-V drug abuse
and alcoholism.
What it said was, we've got
a common causality
for allot our major health
and social problems,
and it was all related to
what had happened to them
as children.
Narrator:
But researchers
like Dr. Roy Wade could see
the ACE Study didn't take
into account economic
distress, let alone hunger,
housing insecurity,
and other hardships
in low-income
neighborhoods.
Wade:
When I came to Philadelphia,
and I saw the huge
amount of blight,
the community violence,
the episodes of racism
and discrimination-
those are stressors, too.
Narrator:
When Philadelphia researchers
expanded the ACE survey
to add questions about racism,
neighborhood safety and
violence outside the home,
they discovered that while 14%
of the general population
reported four or more ACES,
in Philadelphia that number
was a startling 37%.
Wade:
Poverty is an adverse childhood
experience that gets
under your skin.
Living in economic distress
can actually translate
into long-term negative
health outcomes
even for the most
resilient individuals.
Narrator:
Across the country,
physicians, therapists,
teachers-
and even some police
departments and prosecutors
are recognizing how
acknowledging trauma
as a form of injury
opens up the path... to healing.
Corbin:
Trauma-informed care
is extremely important
because it gives a perspective
on how children and families
live in environments.
And also recognizes
what happened to them
and what
they're going through.
They may have been
profoundly affected in ways
that helped to explain
a lot of what the person
is struggling with today.
Well, as you guys know me, I've
been through a lot of violence.
I could have been dead
when I was 16 years old.
Narrator:
Javier Arango is 24 years old
and a counselor at Catholic
Charities of the East Bay
in Oakland.
Before that, he was he was
a gang leader of the 9400 Boys.
He was shot and paralyzed
when he was 17.
Rich:
Feeling unsafe, they may
take actions like getting
weapons or even joining gangs
that put them at risk
for greater injury
in the future.
Everybody that is
around me...
Narrator:
Now Javier counsels young people
as part of a
trauma-informed approach
at the heart of the work
of Catholic Charities.
They provide
not only counseling
and therapy initiatives,
but also Restorative
Justice programs
for schools, housing for at-risk
youth, and assistance
for refugees and immigrants,
recognizing how violence
and social inequality
affect young people.
This morning in the check-in
circle, the staff considers
some of the challenges
faced by the young people
and families they support.
Javier:
My little sister, ever since
she was 8, she already know
when you hear pow-pow-pow,
she knows...
On the floor.
My kids moved the beds
away from the windows.
Yeah.
Millie:
I'd never seen kids
talk about how they
wanted their funeral.
I'd never seen kids
go to a cemetery
to visit 10,15 graves
of their friends.
You know,
this is a new normality
where their mortality
is part of their identity.
If we don't acknowledge
the grief,
if we don't acknowledge
the trauma,
it's more normalization.
And amongst
the young people,
there's a real clear
underlying rage.
They have a real
clear sense
that their lives are
supposed to be valued.
It shouldn't be this way,
because we're the most
richest, wealthiest country
that ever existed and
this stuff's happening here?
One young man said,
"I was worried about
getting killed this summer."
We went around,
we found out that
that was at the core
of everybody's concern.
One of these summers
is going be the one
where everybody's got
my name R.I.P.
And, that struck me,
this sense of inevitability
of violence.
Aarif:
Children would show up
the first day of school and
our expectation would be
for them to come in prepared
to learn, ready to work,
and we didn't know
how many bodies
they had stepped over,
over the summer.
We didn't how many
loved ones they had lost.
Narrator:
Javier has become a friend
and mentor to Kenny Ray
Johnson, who was 14 years old
when he was shot
two years ago.
Throw over here.
I'm gonna1 punch it...
Kenny Ray:
It happened so fast.
I got shot, ten shots.
I felt like I was in the movie,
and I was just thinking
to myself when that happened,
this can't be
happening right now
because I have so much
stuff ahead of me.
Nobody can never wear that
number again at that school.
Kenny Ray has never been
involved in gangs.
Always been a pretty
good student, athlete.
Narrator:
Kenny's injuries left him
wheelchair-bound, learning
to stand with crutches.
The shooting had
a devastating psychological
as well as financial impact
on the family.
Mother:
Me and Dad stayed
at the hospital day and night,
and I couldn't keep
taking off work.
I didn't have no seniority.
I had to stop working.
So that shattered us.
We had to basically start
over from scratch.
So, we couldn't go back there.
It just wasn't the same
to go back there.
It wasn't home, no more.
I didn't even want to come
down to West Oakland.
I hated even going around
the corner where he got shot at.
Also, where Keshad's
classroom was at,
he could look
out the window
and see where his brother
got shot at.
Narrator:
Catholic Charities stepped in
to help solve housing
and financial problems
that threatened to
overwhelm the family.
And they sent counselors,
including Javier.
Javier:
These new guys
being put into wheelchairs,
giving them that
little sense of hope,
that there is a life
to continue,
that gives me more hope,
for me myself
to continue doing
what I'm doing.
Bloom:
Trauma-informed care
begins with,
how do you make people safe?
How do you create
safe zones in schools
and in playgrounds
and in communities
for kids to just be kids?
Narrator:
That's the approach
that inspires Harold Reed
and the staff
of the Boys and Girls Club
at Wilson Park,
in South Philadelphia.
Reed:
Wilson Park, there's an element
of tension that you can
pretty much cut.
And it plays a big role
on the development
of some of the young people
in this community.
So you can't be judgmental.
They need help,
you help them.
If somebody is cut,
you fix the cut.
The Boys and Girls Club
of Wilson Park
is a refreshing glass of water
for some of these young people.
Narrator:
Reed and his staff
provide a safe
and supportive place
with tutoring, sports,
counseling,
and other activities.
Wade:
Oftentimes folks like me
come in, and we come in
as the authorities saying,
"This is what
you have to do."
And we don't tap into
the leadership and the talent
that's in the community.
Individuals like Harold,
who are leaders
within the community
who have the respect
and the skills to navigate
some of the challenges
within the communities.
Reed:
Philadelphia is known
to be the capital
of high school drop-outs.
In our community,
when we first got here,
a lot of people didn't
finish high school.
It's very frustrating to know
that they're building
a $400 million prison
when the schools
are suffering.
Programs, social programs
for young people are suffering.
And I'm proud of the fact
that my young people
are graduating middle school,
graduating high school...
and thinking about
going to college...
Caheri:
It's been five years
since the incident.
I've had extensive therapy
and I thought I overcame.
But I've realized that
post-traumatic stress disorder,
traumatic experiences-
it's a lifelong thing.
Narrator:
Extensive therapy
through the help
of Youth Alive!
intervention specialist
Tammy Cloud
brought Caheri
to the place
where she could use
the experience of her ordeal
to reach out to other
young people in Oakland.
What they did to me was
hella detrimental...
Narrator:
It's one of the many things
Caheri does for the teens
she counsels.
Caheri:
with my kids,
"Check it out,
we're in the same boat.
"I've been there.
"I know what
you're going through.
Let me help you out."
A lot of us kids
who go through this
don't know that there
are resources out there,
and a lot of parents
don't know
that when something so traumatic
like this happens to your child,
you need to connect them
with resources.
Narrator:
At Eleventh Street
Family Health Services
in North Philadelphia,
no matter who patients
speak with,
they will be asked questions
about their day-to-day lives
that help identify
distress and adversity.
Christine Henry found vital
support here for her family
in difficult times.
Things are better now.
She's moved to
a different neighborhood
and has a new job
at a department store.
But Eleventh Street is still
her family health center.
...by how fast you move.
Gotta move quick!
I'm telling you!
You trying to stretch out?
Put this over it...
Gotta happen...
how many rooms?
Two.
Aisha:
The families who come
through Eleventh Street
want more than the best
for their child.
They want things to change.
Narrator:
Healing the hurt of young people
begins with asking not,
"What's wrong with you?"
but, "What happened to you?"
It also means confronting
the racial segregation,
disinvestment and lack of jobs
and decent, safe housing,
which generate suffering
rather than hope
for so many American
children and families.
Simmons:
We've all heard the adage
that "Hurt people hurt people."
And it's true.
Violence is not the problem.
It's the symptom
of the problem.
The people with the greatest
need have the least resource.
Have the least
skilled teachers.
The least outdoor space.
The least music.
The least recreation.
The least art.
The least of all of it, when
they have the greatest need.
And they know that other
people have it and they don't.
We can't have whole
communities of people
locked out of
economic opportunity,
undereducated, under-
and unemployed,
and believe that we can
continue to thrive,
because it's just not possible.
Bloom:
It's time for all Americans
to recognize that we're
suffocating the abilities
of millions of children.
We won't really endorse
real family values,
which mean you
take care of families...
What's... this one?
Ten!
Yeah!